media. At least for the young, those who we consider as digital natives, FB is a natural part of
their media habits and for many of them, there could be a reliance on the platform for expo-
sure to political news. It is thus as important to know the quality of their use of this media plat-
form.[24]
This study is interested in the idea of reliance on FB for information, that is, the degree
to which users are dependent on FB for news so that without it, they would have limited
exposure. We hypothesize that those who are reliant on FB were not politically engaged and
interested to begin with, and thus, would have little political knowledge outside of their FB
feed.
The empirical association between political knowledge and interest, engagement, and par-
ticipation in civic and political activities is well-established (e.g., [25–26]). Understandably,
one’s decisions concerning participation depends on relevant political knowledge.[27] The
positive relationship between Internet use and participation is stronger with interactive plat-
forms like blogs and social networks rather than static platforms online.[28] Social media use,
especially for political content, has been found to correlate with various forms of political par-
ticipation (e.g., [29–30]), although some conflicting findings also question whether these are
effects and whether they are direct or indirect.[26] Further, others contend that the Internet
has caused many to retract from public life.[12] Gil de Zuniga, Jung, and Valenzuela find evi-
dence that information seeking on social media sites are predictive of online and offline partic-
ipatory behaviors.[27] These existing studies guide our further hypothesis that following
various sources of political news on FB feeds, like government institutions, pages of politicians
and candidates, or news pages, would be associated with higher levels of political engagement
and interest, including higher levels of political discussion with others.[31–32] These associa-
tions are hypothesized to exist independently of traditional news media exposure.
Reliance on FB for political news content would mean that one’s news exposure is influ-
enced more strongly by the mechanisms on the platform that determine what kinds of news
and political content appears on a person’s news feed. The main factors that influence the con-
tent you would see on your feed may be likened to filtering: the stories that people in your
social network share, the stories that are viral or trending (popular), and those that are pushed
by paid advertising.[27] Each of these factors interact with the other, for instance news stories
that are “liked” by people in a social network and are trending in the broader environment, are
more likely to appear on your feed.
It is possible that political content exposure on social media is amplified in effect compared
to traditional media. People are able to translate their interests into participation because what
they see include opinions and emotional appeals of people that they know. We are more
inclined to pay attention to utterances from friends and family, and more likely to think more
carefully about arguments that come from them rather than strangers or even reporters.
Groups now turn to social media for recruitment, to expand their constituency.[31, 33] This
line of argument privileges social capital as a key enabler of participative behaviors, both online
and offline.[7, 27, 34]
Since content shared and posted across FB are diverse, and only a portion of it is political in
nature, we expect that those whose social networks have more politically active people will
have greater exposure to news content than others, and that this would be associated with
higher levels of political knowledge and engagement. This is consistent with findings of Wolfs-
feld, Yarchi, and Samuel-Azranal,[35] which show that social media-based political content
exposure is more highly correlated with traditional measures of political participation than
regular media. The association is much stronger even, between social media-based political
news exposure, and digital political participation.
Reliance on Facebook for news
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212263
March 19, 2019
3 / 15
Facebook in the Philippines
The Philippines just entered its status as a “middle-income” country, from a long history of
being a poor country with a large proportion of the population living in poverty (around 22%).
It is a country with low levels of high school and college graduation rates and generally low
access to many forms of technology. Most recent data show laptop and desktop computer
ownership/access at only 24.3% of households across the country,[36] most schools do not
have computers in classrooms, and most students do not have access to one. However, the
rapid adoption of smartphones and the sharp decline in the costs of smartphone units that are
capable of Internet connection led to an expansion of internet access in the Philippines.
Officially, Internet penetration rate in the country is less than 40% for a country of 101 mil-
lion people. However, according to FB, there are over 50 million Filipinos in the country on
their platform. Among those that report having access to the Internet, over 94% report having
a social media account and the vast majority of them are on FB.[37] As such, the Philippines is
often characterized as the social media capital of the world, on top of its reputation as the text-
ing capital of the world. The leading telecommunication companies in the country offer access
to the FB app on smartphones without charging for data usage; this further grew the popula-
tion of Filipinos on FB.
The Philippines has a history of low levels of political knowledge acquired from traditional
media, no doubt owing to the very low circulation rates of newspapers (at best, 15% read the
paper regularly). Most news consumption happens through television, and these days, social
media. Compared to FB growth even in developed countries, FB in the Philippines grew rap-
idly into the main driver of news traffic among the most prestigious news outlets in the coun-
try. A paper (authors) on the role of FB on news reporting in the country reveals that among
the top 4 news websites, FB-referred traffic accounts for between 60%-90% of clicks into news
sites. This was a year ago and it is reasonable to think that these percentages have grown since.
Television remains the number 1 news source across the country; but among those with Inter-
net access, it is likely that the majority of news consumption is FB-driven.
This unique situation of the Philippine news reading public makes it a good venue to study
the potential implications of reliance on FB for political news. Fresh out of a contentious elec-
tion with controversial results, FB-based campaigning and political activism have flourished
and thrived, some say, to the detriment of civilized political debate. Online discussions and
comments grew vicious and sometimes violent, and full of political–and personal–vitriol, thus
recently prompting the Senate to open a hearing on the problem of social media’s effect on cul-
ture. Clearly FB has an important role to play in the Philippines’ news use, political knowledge,
and engagement with politics, providing an interesting context for understanding the relation-
ships hypothesized in this study.
Hypotheses
Based on where we are now in the literature on social media, political knowledge, and engage-
ment, this research seeks to contribute to this fast-growing area by looking specifically at FB as
a news source, reliance on it as a source of news and information, and its correlation with
political engagement.
This research is guided by an interest in answering the research question: Is FB use associ-
ated with political engagement, knowledge, and opinions about important political issues? To
systematically investigate how these concepts relate to each other, the following hypotheses are
posed:
H1: Those on social media who rely less on FB as a news source exhibit higher levels of per-
ceived knowledge about politics than those who rely more on it for news.
Reliance on Facebook for news
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212263
March 19, 2019
4 / 15
