performance demands encourage, and perhaps even
impel, the experimental use of substances [13, 14, 29].
For example, in one study, banned athletes reported that
a motivation for doping was to keep pace with com-
petitors and ensure the financial rewards of success
[30], a form of rationale Kirkwood labelled ‘defensive
doping’ [31]. Perhaps more worrisome is Fincoeur et
al.’s caution that the pursuit of substance suppliers by
the drug regulators can potentially drive athletes to
secure illegitimate and uncontrolled sources, and thus
exacerbate the banned substance-use problem [32].
From compliance to health
In 2004, WADA introduced its global anti-doping code.
With the International Olympic Committee’s endorse-
ment, it soon became the policy benchmark. Three key
objectives underpin WADA’s mission and policy initia-
tives: first, to protect the athletes’ fundamental rights to
participate in drug-free sport; second, to promote health,
fairness, and equality for athletes worldwide; and finally,
to ensure harmonised and effective anti-doping pro-
grammes at the international and national levels incorpor-
ating standardised approaches to detection, deterrence,
and prevention. The code contains a list of banned sub-
stances including performance-enhancing drugs like EPO,
human growth hormone, anabolic androgenic steroids,
the more powerful anti-inflammatory drugs and stimu-
lants, and a range of non-performance enhancing, illicit
drugs like cannabis, ecstasy, and cocaine. Exemptions exist
in the code for athletes who can demonstrate a legitimate
therapeutic purpose for a banned substance. In these in-
stances, athletes with documented medical conditions like
asthma can request a therapeutic use exemption from
their national anti-doping agency and national sport gov-
erning body.
Under WADA’s policy, drugs that enhance perform-
ance are immediately corralled, since using drugs to help
secure a winning edge constitutes cheating, which as
noted before, will not be tolerated. Second, drugs that
constitute a risk to the athlete’s health also fall into the
anti-doping net. According to WADA, sport organisa-
tions hold a duty of care to the athletes who participate
in their competitions and, as a result, must be protected
through prohibitions on substances incurring health
risks. The third and final element of the WADA anti-
doping code is more contentious since it outlaws any
drug that violates the ‘spirit-of-sport’.
According to the code, the spirit-of-sport encapsu-
lates the ideals of Olympism, the celebration of the
human spirit, fun, and joy, courage, teamwork, excel-
lence in performance, respect for the rules and other
participants, dedication and commitment, character
and education, community and solidarity, ethics, fair
play, and honesty. These values have been conflated
into the initial WADA slogan of ‘play-true’ and its
current mantra of ‘drug-free’ sport. If a drug meets
two of the above three criteria, it will be listed as a
banned substance.
Under the WADA code, drugs like EPO, human
growth hormone, steroids, and stimulants both enhance
performance and constitute a health risk, and therefore
remain banned. WADA policy also places illicit drugs
under the banned-substance umbrella. However, unlike
the all-year-round ban on performance-enhancing drugs,
the illicit drug ban only applies to in-competition or in-
season use. While cannabis, ecstasy, and cocaine do not
enhance performance, they do introduce health risks.
Crucially, because their illegal use undermines the spirit-
of-sport, they too are banned. In fact, any illicit drug is,
according to WADA, contrary to the spirit-of-sport
since it diminishes the good name and public image
sport commands. Caffeine, however, no longer appears
on the banned list. Although caffeine improves per-
formance, it is not illegal, does not incur health con-
cerns, and fits the play-true requirement. Neither is
alcohol nor tobacco/nicotine a major problem under
the WADA Code since they also fit the play-true
requirement in that they do not for the most part
improve sporting performance, remain freely available
to adults, and form an integral part of sporting club
culture. Yet, studies reveal that athletes binge-drink
and use recreational drugs to alleviate the pressure
accumulated from demanding seasons of abstinence
and stress [33]. The use of analgesics and painkillers
also remains unclear especially when under legitimate
prescription by medical practitioners.
Athletes occupy a world where drug use is embedded
in community culture and practice. While large numbers
of drugs are misused and produce significant social
costs, they also provide the community with a better
quality of life. A cursory look at mainstream drug use
statistics shows that drug use is not an aberrant behaviour
confined to a problematic subculture of deviants and
misfits [34]. While the social burden of illicit drug use is
undeniably severe, conflating the so-called war on drugs
with a war on doping may risk ignoring the unique elite
sporting context. Importing illicit drug policy into the
sporting arena assumes that performance doping mir-
rors recreational and addictive drug behaviours, which
doping undermines sport and morality in a similar
way as criminal drug trafficking, and that doping
decisions can be influenced by rational evaluations of
the risk of severe penalties [35, 36]. It might also be
ambitious to expect elite athletes to eliminate their
use of drugs when society as a whole relies on drugs
to help its members cope with the pressures and tensions
of daily living and to help them feel psychologically and
physically better.
Smith and Stewart Harm Reduction Journal  (2015) 12:53 
Page 3 of 6
Such mixed messages become compounded when we
assume that using an over-the-counter drug with signifi-
cant side effects is acceptable, but the use of an illicit
drug with no greater side effect is not only taboo but
also indicative of a moral failing. The message can be
further confused when officials, journalists, and fans not
only demand that athletes always perform at their best
but also remind them that failure will be publically scru-
tinised. In analysing a series of case studies, Carstairs ex-
posed the complex and often contradictory responses to
doping expressed through the popular media, message
boards, and polls [37]. Athletes who have failed drug
tests
can
receive
sympathy
and
condemnation
simultaneously.
An alternative policy
We contend that the primary principle of sound drug
management in sport should be HR. In the context of
sport, the HR approach illuminates three principles.
First, drug use is not just a sporting matter nor is it a
criminal or legal matter. Instead, drug use in sport con-
stitutes a serious social issue [38]. Second, HR obviates
the need for any form of moral certitude [39]. Instead, it
accepts that drug use exists in sport and will never be
completely eliminated. Third, although HR does not
condone the use of drugs in sport, it acknowledges that
when it does occur, policy makers have an obligation to
develop public health measures that reduce drug-related
harm to all athletes, irrespective of their status or ambi-
tion [40]. For example, policies that exclusively pursue
the elimination of doping do not account for high or low
risk use. Conversely, some evidence indicates that harm
reduction polices providing education, private support,
and rehabilitation, lower the social costs and cultural
damage associated with substance use [41]. The key
issue for HR therefore has less to do with the short-term
brand equity and credibility that might be tarnished by a
drug use or drug trafficking incident, and more to do with
the long-term best interests of sport participants.
Unlike current drug control policies, HR is not about
obstructive policing, incessant testing, onerous investiga-
tion, and severe sanctioning. Instead, it focuses on build-
ing structures and systems that deliver a number of
harm reduction outcomes including for example: (1) the
creation of a playing environment where safety and ef-
fective harm management are strategic priorities; (2) a
drug supply and distribution system that is regulated
through the direct involvement of physicians and phar-
macists; (3) the design of promotional campaigns that
educate athletes about the risks associated with various
substances; (4) the early intervention of medical support
where damage to oneself or to others has occurred
through some form of drug use; (5) the availability of
broad-based drug rehabilitation and counselling services
that allow athletes to remediate their high risk behav-
iours; and (6) a transparent listing or register of the
drugs used by all sporting bodies and athletes. In this
context, regulation becomes useful only in so far as it
lessens the potential harm of participants.
Conclusions
Despite the pressures on serious athletes to use sub-
stances as they move along the performance pathway,
our data show that mid-tier athletes practice consider-
able self-determination in selecting which substances to
utilise [14]. The same thinking that leads individuals to
improve their equipment technologies, strengthen their
training programmes, and take nutritional supplements,
also leads them to evaluate the benefits and costs of not
only pushing the boundaries by using complex, high-
dose multi-mix supplements but also by crossing the
boundary into the realm of banned drug use. Yet we
know little about these cogitations, when athletes are
most vulnerable during their life cycles and the decision-
making that emerges as a consequence. These findings
suggest that sports officials have a window of opportun-
ity for guiding serious athletes into safe and legal sub-
stance use through well-timed educational campaigns
that deliver non-judgmental analyses of the strengths
and weaknesses of substance use in all of its intricacies.
We should also not forget that the majority of published
studies have focused on clinical populations and case
studies which tend not to address the supra-therapeutic
regimens and complex pharmacology employed by ath-
letes. Moreover, the most dangerous and prolific usage of
substances can be found in groups primarily interested in
recreational performance and image-enhancement, be it
to build muscle, strip fat, or iron-out cellulite [42, 43].
Although HR is especially controversial and ‘messy’
[44] in a sporting context since it appears to condone
practices that may be illegal and apparently unfair, it ac-
cepts the fact that drugs will always be part of a risky
and tilted playing field full of moral ambiguity. Equally,
it also allows for a stronger platform of education and
social marketing and the provision of personnel and fa-
cilities that ensure a safe and protective sport environ-
ment where athlete welfare holds sovereign.
A zero-tolerance approach to drug use in sport lever-
ages a strong sense of moral certitude, but it has not
worked [45, 46]. In an interview with BBC in July this
year, WADA Director General David Howman claimed
that more than 10 % of elite athletes were doping. The
greatest area of concern, he noted, was the level of up
and coming athletes trying to get what he called a
‘breakthrough’, which made them more susceptible to
substance abuse. Harm reduction approaches will never
eliminate use, but they deliver a humane service to a co-
hort of talented performers who deserve a safe and
Smith and Stewart Harm Reduction Journal  (2015) 12:53 
Page 4 of 6
