In order to attain medication safety in
polypharmacy management, a strategy could
be developed using the strategic framework of
the third WHO Global Patient Safety Challenge:
Medication Without Harm. The key domains 
to be addressed as part of this framework
include patients and the public, medicines,
health care professionals, and systems and
practices of medication. The four domains 
and the cross-cutting theme of monitoring 
and evaluation are elaborated in the following
sections, addressing a health system 
approach for implementing polypharmacy
programmes under the umbrella of 
the Challenge.
4.1 Patients and the public
The role of patients in delivering
appropriate polypharmacy
Raising patient awareness about the problems
of polypharmacy and non-adherence is
important, as patients can play a key role in the
prevention and early detection of inappropriate
polypharmacy (11, 21). Patients should be 
seen as shared decision-makers on the use of
medication, and health care professionals need
to support patients, families and caregivers in
order to enable them to undertake this role (8).
Patients should be encouraged and supported
to disclose all the medications they are taking,
including OTC and traditional and
complementary medicines, especially if they
are suffering from multiple conditions and are
being treated with polypharmacy (94). Health
literacy, social norms and cultural factors 
would need to be taken into account when
considering the role of patients, and designing
materials for patient education (95, 96). 
Patient tools and materials can support the
engagement and empowerment of patients,
families and caregivers in playing an active 
role in health care. Such resource materials
may include:
• Patient-held medication list or patient-held
medication record, sometimes called
medication passport (either paper or
electronic), can help to optimize patients’
medicines. The use of these tools has
received positive feedback from patients (97).
Such lists, provided that they are up-to-date,
can also be helpful at care transitions (98).
• Patient resource materials that enable
patients to understand how to make
decisions regarding management of their
health conditions and their medications 
are available (99, 100). An example of 
a tailormade tool is the Medicine Sick Day
Rules card, which explains to patients which
medicines should be temporarily stopped
during dehydration due to an illness (101).
Different organizations, including WHO, 
have developed materials that include 
simple questions to encourage patients 
to be active participants in their therapeutic
decision-making (102–104). For example, 
the 5 Moments for Medication Safety focuses
on five key moments in the medication use
process, where action by the patient, family
member or caregiver can greatly reduce 
the risk of harm associated with the use 
of medications. The tool aims to engage 
and empower patients to be involved in their
own care in a more proactive way and feel
responsible for it, encourage their curiosity
about the medications they are taking,
empower them to communicate openly 
with their health professionals and be
involved in shared decision-making (104).
Technology could improve both patient
experience and medication adherence.
Furthermore, it has potential to enable patients
to be active participants in medication reviews.
However, more research is required to evaluate
strategies for integrating such tools into clinical
practice and to ensure they meet their potential
in improving patient outcomes and creating
value for all users (105, 106).
Prioritizing patients for medication reviews
in polypharmacy 
Due to limited resources in most health care
systems, patients who may benefit from
medication reviews need to be prioritized.
There are many factors that could increase 
the likelihood of predisposing a patient to harm
24
MEDICATION SAFETY IN POLYPHARMACY
25
MEDICATION SAFETY IN POLYPHARMACY
from medication. Research has shown that
patients on multiple medications have 
a higher risk of medication-related harm, due 
to harm from occurrences such as drug–drug
interactions, falls and adverse events (8, 48).
Any methods for identifying patients at risk due
to polypharmacy need to be considered in the
clinical context. Even in resource-limited
settings with inadequate health information
databases, the following criteria can be applied
to identify situations where a medication review
may prove beneficial:
• residents in a care home setting (12, 21)
• patients on high-risk (high-alert) medications
(see Annex 1) (12)
• patients taking 10 or more medicines 
(12, 21, 107)
• patients with two or more co-morbidities (12)
• patients with frailty (12, 77, 20)
• patients with dementia (12, 108)
• palliative care situations (8, 12)
4.2 Health care professionals
Health care professionals and policy-makers
can take a leadership role in raising awareness
among peers regarding the role of medication
review in reducing the harm associated 
with inappropriate polypharmacy (11). 
Development of multidisciplinary workforce
through changes in undergraduate,
postgraduate, and continuing professional
development has been identified as a key area
to address polypharmacy (22). Educational
curricula for health care professionals, including
physicians, pharmacists and nurses, should
include safe medication management to
develop necessary competencies and skills 
for addressing risks associated with
polypharmacy (109). To help support education
of health care professionals, a set of clinical
case studies are presented in Annex 4.
Existing guidelines that incorporate key steps
for patient-centered medication review should
be shared to ensure the dissemination of best
practices, including the importance of sharing
the information about the outcomes of 
the medication review in polypharmacy 
with relevant health care professionals.
Establishing support networks to enable 
health care professionals in sharing scientific
and practical information on polypharmacy 
may assist in that regard. There are several
special interest groups focusing on appropriate
polypharmacy available internationally
(110–112).
Health care professionals working in
multidisciplinary teams deliver optimum
outcomes for patients. They need to be
aware of human factors that may affect their
performance and the performance of others
(113). Knowledge of human factors can be
further useful in communication with 
patients and in shared decision-making 
in polypharmacy (109).
A study from Hawaii revealed that many older
persons were uncertain about the information
about their medications and did not exhibit
confidence on understanding the ADRs
associated with use of multiple medications
(114). This emphasizes the need for
interventions that are aimed at enhancing 
the provider–patient interaction about
polypharmacy and medication reviews. 
Safety culture should be addressed to enable
health care professionals and patients 
to discuss issues of polypharmacy, so that
patients feel that it is safe and acceptable 
to ask questions (95). For example, Choosing
Wisely campaign focuses on promoting
dialogue between health care professionals 
and patients; with the aim to reduce utilization
of inappropriate tests and medical treatment,
empower patients to ask questions, and help
patients to choose evidence-based care (115).
4.3 Medicines
Polypharmacy and drug interactions 
Patients with polypharmacy might be subject 
to drug–drug, drug–food, drug–disease 
or herb–drug interactions (116). Detection 
of drug interactions should be included 
