22 
Guidelines for the prevention, management and care of diabetes mellitus
Metabolic syndrome
Often a person with abnormal glucose tolerance (IGT or diabetes) will be found 
to have at least one or more of the other cardiovascular disease risk factors such 
as hypertension, central (upper body) obesity, and dyslipidaemia. This clustering 
has been labelled diversely as the metabolic syndrome, syndrome X, or the insulin 
resistance syndrome [21]. Epidemiological studies confirm that this syndrome occurs 
commonly in a wide variety of ethnic groups including Caucasians, Afro-Americans, 
Mexican-Americans, Asian Indians, Chinese, Australian Aborigines, Polynesians and 
Micronesians. In 1988, Dr Gerald Reaven focused attention on this cluster, naming it 
Syndrome X. Central obesity was not included in the original description, so the term 
metabolic syndrome is now favoured. Alone, each component of the cluster conveys 
increased cardiovascular disease risk, but as a combination they become much more 
powerful. This means that the management of persons with hyperglycaemia and other 
features of the metabolic syndrome should focus not only on blood glucose control but 
also include strategies to reduce the impact of other cardiovascular disease risk factors.
The metabolic syndrome with normal glucose tolerance identifies the subject as a 
member of a group at very high risk of future diabetes. Thus, vigorous early management 
of the syndrome may have a significant impact on the prevention of both diabetes and 
cardiovascular disease, especially as it is well documented that the features of the metabolic 
syndrome can be present for up to 10 years before glycaemic disorder is detected.
Box 1. Diagnostic criteria for gestational diabetes [21,23]
75 g OGTT with two or more positive values
fasting ≥95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L)
1 hour ≥180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L)
2 hours ≥155 mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L)
100 g OGTT with two or more positive values
fasting ≥95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L)
1 hour ≥180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L)
2 hours ≥155 mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L)
3 hours ≥140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)
or
50 g GCT with blood glucose value after 1 hour
≥130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L), then confirm with 75 g or 100 g OGTT 
OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test; GCT, glucose challenge test
Diabetes mellitus in special groups and circumstances 
23
Diagnosis of metabolic syndrome
At least three of the five criteria shown in Table 5 must be met to diagnose metabolic 
syndrome.
Several other components of the metabolic syndrome have been described (e.g. 
hyperuricaemia, coagulation disorders) but are not considered criteria for its diagnosis.
Hypertension
Background
Macrovascular disease constitutes the major cause of diabetes mortality, with 80% 
of patients having and/or dying of cardiovascular, cerebrovascular or peripheral arterial 
disease.  Patients with diabetes mellitus exhibit a two to four-fold increase in the risk of 
coronary events compared to non-diabetic individuals.
Although large-scale studies have shown a clear association between improvement 
in glycaemic control and reduction in microvascular end-organ damage (retinopathy, 
nephropathy and neuropathy), they have not been able to show a consistent similar 
relationship between glycaemic control and macrovascular complications.  However, 
many trials have shown a benefit with respect to cardiovascular events, morbidity and 
mortality when co-existent hypertension is treated.  In addition, control of hypertension 
is also beneficial to microvascular complications. This issue is of paramount importance 
since close to 60% of patients with diabetes are known to have hypertension.  Therefore 
aggressive strategies aimed at identifying and treating high blood pressure in patients 
with diabetes should lead to substantial reduction in the risk of cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality.  
Table 5. Diagnostic criteria for the metabolic syndrome
Criteria 
Defining level
 
Abdominal obesity
 
 Men 
 
 
Waist circumference >102 cm (>40 inches)
 
 Women 
 
 
Waist circumference >88 cm (>35 inches)
 
High levels of triglycerides 
At least 150 mg/dL
 
Low HDL cholesterol
 
 Men 
 
 
<40 mg/dL
 
 Women 
 
 
<50 mg/dL
 
High blood pressure 
 
At least 130/>85 mmHg
 
High fasting glucose 
 
At least 110 mg/dL
HDL: high-density lipid
