214
	
C. C. Verharen 
1 3
Whether such remarks represent Nietzsche’s fundamental convictions is not a question that 
this essay addresses. The essay emphasizes Nietzsche’s anti-democratic remarks in order to 
construct an educational model that opposes them.
Nietzsche stated that the force of an education for the privileged elite would enable a 
unified European culture to take command of the whole earth. His prophetic powers are 
extraordinary. The globalism that binds the earth together a century after Nietzsche’s death 
emerges from European education’s focus on the science and technology that now threaten 
life on earth.
Can that same science and technology provide a platform for a democratized education? 
In FE’s Introduction, Nietzsche contends that grounds must have already been prepared in 
order for change to take place: No one should prognosticate about the future of culture and 
education “if he cannot prove that this culture of the future is to some extent already pre-
sent and need only assert itself much more strongly….” (FE, 91). Jonas and Yacek argue 
that the grounds for democratizing education can be found in what they call Nietzsche’s 
“qualified egalitarianism” (2018, 102). However, Nietzsche’s remarks oppose democratic 
education from his earliest to latest writings. Technology’s power to make a philosophical 
education universally available was not yet evident in the nineteenth century. Nietzsche 
declared that the “press, the machine, the railway, the telegraph are premises whose thou-
sand-year conclusion no one has yet dared to draw” (“Wanderer and His Shadow,” HATH 
[278], 378). Nevertheless, his remarks did not envision the human potential revealed in 
twentieth century liberation movements that challenged nineteenth century sexism, racism 
and classism.
Nietzsche’s formative thinking directed itself to ancient Greek culture. The classism 
of that culture would not permit universal schooling at any level. Nietzsche’s biographer, 
Rüdiger Safranski, states that Nietzsche sanctioned child labor, “noting with approval that 
Basel permitted children over the age of twelve to work up to eleven hours a day.” He 
also spoke against adult education (2003, 148–149). Nietzsche took both his philosophi-
cal method and his elitism from ancient Greece. Scholars have interpreted his sexist, rac-
ist and classist remarks that echo Greek sentiments as hyperbolic or ironic (see Jonas and 
Yacek, endnotes 1–10, 117–119 for an extensive list). This essay takes those remarks at 
face value in order to construct an educational model that opposes them. In numerous 
explicit remarks, Nietzsche with Aristotle advocates androcentrism, elevating men over 
women (Aristotle 1941). He goes even further to promote ethnocentrism, imagining that 
the collective European nations through their Greek heritage will lead the world to a thou-
sands of years European Reich. Like Plato and Aristotle and many of his own nineteenth 
century contemporary Europeans, Nietzsche states that humans can be divided into masters 
and slaves by reason of their diverse capacities for leadership (Plato 1966).
Nietzsche remarked that an enslaved humanity would willingly follow their European 
masters. The 2nd edition of the Gay Science (GS Part V [377], 241) advocates a “new 
slavery—for every strengthening and enhancement of the human type also involves a new 
kind of enslavement—doesn’t it?” And unlike Aristotle who imagined that slavery could be 
replaced by machine technology, Nietzsche stated that slavery was an inborn trait. While 
Nietzsche multiplied sexist remarks only after his traumatic relationship with Lou Salomé 
(he nearly committed suicide), his remarks are resolutely racist and classist from the 1871 
“Greek State” to the 1888 Ecce Homo Nietzsche (1871/1872).
Rejecting the “Deutschland über Alles” of his own times that was to become Nazi Ger-
many’s catchword, Nietzsche proposed a united Europa über Alles. As early as Human, 
All Too Human, he announces that “man has to set himself ecumenical goals embracing 
the whole earth” (HATH [25], 25). He delegates this task to the “good” Europeans whose 
215
An Odd Coupling: Nietzsche and W.E.B. Du Bois on 21st Century…
1 3
“great task” is the “direction and supervision of the total culture of the earth” (WS [87], 
332). In the late notebooks he foresaw emergent international dynasties dedicating them-
selves to “the task of rearing a master race, the future ‘masters of the earth.’” This “aristoc-
racy” will “last for thousands of years” by reason of the “will of philosophical men” who 
will use “democratic Europe” as the mechanism controlling “the destinies of the earth.” 
Such aristocrats possess such extraordinary power because of the “superiority of their will-
ing, knowing, wealth and influence.” Nietzsche predicts a time “when we will learn to think 
differently about politics” (Writings from the Late Notebooks 2003/1885–1888, 2 [57], 71).
Critics may suggest that Nietzsche reserved this kind of intemperance for his private 
thoughts. Nevertheless, in Ecce Homo he castigates German nationalism for provoking 
wars that temporarily “cheated” Europe out of a “force majeure…strong enough to make 
Europe into a unity, a political and economic unity for the purpose of world governance…” 
(EH “The Case of Wagner,” [2] 140). Taking a page from Charles Darwin’s cousin, Francis 
Galton, Nietzsche in the same text advocates for a eugenics capable of “breeding human-
ity to higher levels (which includes the ruthless extermination of everything degenerate 
and parasitical).” Nietzsche promises a “tragic age” brought about by the “harshest though 
most necessary wars” (EH “The Birth of Tragedy” [4], 110). Against the claim that such 
effusions result from Nietzsche’s terminal dementia in the fall of 1888, Aaron Ridley, edi-
tor of the Cambridge Ecce Homo, claims that the text’s hyperbole dramatizes an accurate 
expression of Nietzsche’s conclusive thoughts (2005/1888, Introduction, vii–xxxiv).
Saturated in the sexism, racism and classism of nineteenth century Europe, Nietzsche’s 
published remarks do not present a way forward that would destroy the barrier between 
master and herd. Liberation movements challenging those three “isms” in the intervening 
centuries should remind us that Nietzsche begs us to repudiate his own work in order to 
create better avenues to the future. Human, All Too Human speaks of the danger that a 
“great thinker” who believes he possesses “absolute truth” will become “a tyrant” (HATH 
[261], 124). Calling himself a herald rather than a knight, Nietzsche advises his readers to 
create their own philosophies: “At least be readers of this book, so that later, through your 
actions, you can consign it to destruction and obliteration” (FE [Preface], 95). The problem 
is that the three “isms” have been characteristic features of humans at least since the dawn 
of recorded history and perhaps longer. What hope is there of overcoming them? Is the glo-
rious unification of humanity even remotely possible?
History discloses humanity’s proclivity to increase the size of its groups. Think-
ers like the Buddha and Christ pleaded for humanity to form itself into a single unified 
group. Kant, Hegel and Marx saw human unification as an inevitable progression. Dar-
win (1936/1871) argued that expansion of group definition emerges from evolutionary 
processes. He made two claims about conditions for survival (see Johnson 2010; Rich-
ardson 2004; Ridley 2016). First, groups that increase their numbers have a competitive 
edge. Second, groups that bind their members tightly together increase their chances for 
survival. Humanity moves in the direction of increasing group size, from familial units to 
tribes to tribal nations to nation states to empires. Nietzsche joined Kant, Hegel and Marx 
(the latter unknowingly!) in thinking that a glorious future could unite all humanity into a 
single group. So, there is evidence of a historical movement that could buttress their col-
lective optimism. More importantly, contemporary threats of mass extinction of life present 
humanity with a choice we have never had before. We can unite as a single group to guar-
antee life’s future or we can exterminate ourselves. One ironic reason for optimism is the 
current Covid-19 pandemic. The world must unite to counter this threat and guard against 
subsequent zoonotic viruses that may be even more virulent.
216
	
C. C. Verharen 
1 3
Combatting the Covid-19 pandemic requires virtually all humans to engage in a strug-
gle against a mortal enemy. However, the pandemic will run its course, whether stopped by 
effective vaccines or by killing millions before herd immunity is established. Challenging 
the other existential crises will require creating new knowledge on a scale the world has not 
yet imagined. There is no clear path to stopping catastrophic climate change. The Harvard 
biologist E. O. Wilson (2016) recommends returning half of the earth’s land surface to 
nature in order to halt the sixth mass extinction of life, but current political and economic 
paths to that goal are absent. Nations continue to develop nuclear, chemical and biologi-
cal weapons of mass destruction. No current practice prevents nations, non-governmental 
groups or individuals from deploying these weapons in acts of terrorism. For the first time 
in Homo sapiens’ 300,000 life span, humans have acquired the ability to create the sixth 
mass extinction. Nature created the first five mass extinctions. Only a creative humanity 
bonded together as one group may have the power to stop the sixth.
Against Malthusian fears about the overpopulation of the earth, Nietzsche’s Wanderer 
and His Shadow presents a metaphor of the entire human community becoming “a tree 
that overshadows the whole earth” while the earth nourishes this tree. To achieve this goal, 
“whole nations, whole centuries toil to discover and thoroughly to test new methods for 
promoting a great human collective….” The task requires much suffering. In the best case, 
select individuals through their “wisdom and prudence” will create “the measures adopted 
by whole nations and whole ages.” The path is perilous as humanity possesses no “infalli-
ble instinct” for choosing methods that prevent its destruction. Nevertheless, we must “look 
in the face our great task of preparing the earth for the production of the greatest and most 
joyful fruitfulness – a task for reason on behalf of reason!” (Nietzsche’s emphasis, HATH 
[189], 356).
Du Bois’ advocacy for universal university education
Proposing a radical philosophy of higher education, W.E.B. Du Bois (1973) imagined a 
time when virtually all humans would have a university education: “Today there is but one 
rivalry between culture and vocation, college training and trade and professional education 
and that is the rivalry of Time. Someday every human being will have college training” 
(The Education of Black People 1973, 106).
Du Bois advocated an education for all humans that would unleash their creative poten-
tial. He argued that African American colleges and universities have a unique ethical 
obligation to serve as the spearhead to universal higher education: They “can show the 
majority the way of life.” He wrote in 1941 that “salvation and culture” come not from 
“overwhelming rich and powerful groups” but from the “still small voice of the oppressed 
and the determined who knew more than to die and plan more than mere survival” (1973, 
177).
In Nietzsche’s time, one that overlapped with that of the young Du Bois, Du Bois’ 
prophesy was preposterous. In our time, it is imperative. Humanity’s crises are so dire that 
virtually every human must be working toward solutions to those crises. Du Bois notes 
that in his time universities’ elitism separated humans into two classes: the educated and 
the uneducated: “This is the problem of education with which the world is most familiar, 
and it tends to two ends: it makes the mass of men dissatisfied with life and it makes the 
university a system of culture for the cultured” (1973, 85). He foresaw a future in which 
all humans would be able to exercise the university’s primary function: research to solve 
217
An Odd Coupling: Nietzsche and W.E.B. Du Bois on 21st Century…
1 3
humanity’s unsolved problems (Verharen et al. 2014b). In his philosophy of democratic 
education, “the marvelous talent and diversity and emotion of all mankind” will flourish to 
the degree that the “university reaches down to the mass of universal men and makes the 
life of normal men the object of its training…” (1973, 86–7).
Du Bois began to overcome his earlier restriction of university education to the “tal-
ented tenth” on his first trip to Africa: “Once upon a time some four thousand miles east 
of this place, I saw the functioning of a perfect system of education. It was in West Africa, 
beside a broad river…” (1973, 83). He observed this “perfect system,” developed in “Yoru-
bas and other Sudanese and Bantu” villages where “education was completely integrated 
with life. There could not be uneducated people. There could be no education that was not 
at once for use in earning a living and for use in living a life” (1973, 84).
Du Bois gradually overcame his opposition to Booker T. Washington’s philosophy of 
industrial training for African Americans in historically Black colleges in the southern 
United States. Anticipating the African working model for a “united college and vocational 
school” described in the essay’s next section, Du Bois’ reformed university would gradu-
ate alumni “who can think clearly and function normally as physical beings; who have a 
knowledge of what human life on earth has been, and what it is now; and a knowledge of 
the constitution of the known universe” (1973, 76).
The curriculum for such a university mirrors the curriculum that Nietzsche proposed for 
training students to achieve the synoptic vision characteristic of philosophers. The curricu-
lum includes all seven intellectual disciplines building upon the pure abstractions of math-
ematics, logic and grammar (the traditional 3 R’s of grammar school) and extending to the 
global reach of the fine and technical arts, history, science and philosophy itself. Against 
Nietzsche’s conception of the ancient Greek origin of this curriculum, Du Bois traces its 
general outlines back to Africa in earliest recorded history: “The riddle of existence is 
the college curriculum that was laid before the Pharaohs, that was taught in the groves by 
Plato, that formed the trivium and quadrivium, and is to-day laid before the freedmen’s 
sons by Atlanta University” (1990, 64).
Du Bois believed that African Americans have a mission to make “the ideal of human 
brotherhood…a practical possibility, a mission “to civilization and humanity, which no 
other race can make” (1995, 26.) His argument is based on the idea that those who suffer 
most from a problem have the strongest incentive to solve the problem. He believes the 
“black votes of Reconstruction” were instrumental in developing public school systems in 
the southern United States. The impetus came from Black Union troops in Missouri “fight-
ing the last battle of the West” who conceived of systematic education of their fellows in 
their home state. … The public school system of the whole South is the gift of black folk” 
(1973), 129).
In Du Bois’ philosophy of education, a primary mission of historically Black colleges 
and universities (HBCUs) is to serve as the spearhead for universal university educa-
tion (Verharen et al. 2020). In the last century a number of HBCUs developed continu-
ing education programs to reach African Americans who had not been able to continue 
their education past high school. Anna Julia Cooper, the first African American to receive 
a PhD in philosophy from the Sorbonne, dedicated her house near Howard University in 
Washington, DC to adult education. Alain Locke, the first African American to receive 
a Rhodes scholarship and the first to receive a PhD in philosophy from Harvard, champi-
oned the cause of adult education in his research. Carter G. Woodson wrote extensively 
on how adult education might offset the “miseducation of the Negro” (Locke 1989; Grant 
et al. 2016). Howard discontinued its continuing education programs toward the end of the 
last century because of funding problems. More generally, underfunding and impoverished 
