11
MEDICATION SAFETY IN POLYPHARMACY
Introduction
1
This technical report does not attempt 
to cover the entire scope of polypharmacy, 
but merely aims to introduce polypharmacy 
as a concept, and examine some approaches
for the appropriate management of
polypharmacy, which are crucial for ensuring
greater medication safety.
1.1 Polypharmacy
Despite the increasing prevalence 
of polypharmacy, the term continues to lack 
a clear universal definition. A recent systematic
review of the definitions of polypharmacy
showed that the term was most commonly
applied to situations where patients took five 
or more medications, and this numerical
definition was used by 46.4% of the studies
evaluated (7). Furthermore, there are
inconsistencies with the use regarding 
duration of therapy and whether to include 
over-the-counter (OTC), and traditional and
complementary medicines in the definition 
or not. However, with the aim of reducing
medication-related harm, it is important 
to verify to the fullest extent possible all 
the medications that the patient is taking, 
including all OTC, and traditional and
complementary medicines. 
While polypharmacy is often defined as
routinely taking a minimum of five medicines,
it is being more frequently suggested that 
the emphasis should be on evidenced-based
practice (7). The goal should be to reduce
inappropriate polypharmacy (irrational
prescribing of too many medicines) 
and to ensure appropriate polypharmacy
(rational prescribing of multiple medicines
based on best available evidence and
considering individual patient factors and
context) (7–11). Therefore, appropriate
polypharmacy should be considered at every
point of initiation of a new treatment for the
patient, and when the patient moves across
different health care settings.
Polypharmacy is the concurrent use 
of multiple medications. Although there
is no standard definition, polypharmacy 
is often defined as the routine use of five 
or more medications. This includes 
over-the-counter, prescription and/or
traditional and complementary medicines
used by a patient (see Annex 1).
12
MEDICATION SAFETY IN POLYPHARMACY
Polypharmacy has been described as 
a significant public health challenge (13). 
It increases the likelihood of adverse effects,
with a significant impact on health outcomes
and expenditure on health care resources
(14–16). Although co-prescribing multiple
medicines increases the risk of adverse events,
it is important to note that assigning a numeric
threshold to define polypharmacy is not always
useful. There are cases where polypharmacy
is necessary and beneficial, such as the
secondary prevention of myocardial infarction,
which requires the use of four different classes
of medications (a beta blocker, a statin, an
antiplatelet agent and an ACE inhibitor) (8, 12).
Appropriate polypharmacy recognizes that
patients can benefit from multiple medications
if the patients’ clinical conditions,
comorbidities, allergy profiles, the potential
drug–drug and drug–disease interactions 
are considered, and the medicines are
prescribed based on the best available
evidence (17). Thus, it is critical to distinguish
appropriate polypharmacy from inappropriate
polypharmacy (12).
The most vulnerable patient groups to the risks
of polypharmacy are susceptible to events 
such as drug–drug interactions, higher risk 
of falls, ADRs, cognitive impairment, 
non-adherence and poor nutritional status
(18–20). Vulnerable patient groups often 
include older patients above the age of 
65 years and patients who are living in care
homes (19–21).
1.2 Prevalence of polypharmacy
Polypharmacy is a major and growing public
health issue occurring within all health care
settings worldwide (8, 13). The issue is well
described in literature from countries in North
America (10, 18), Europe (8, 22) and the
Western Pacific (23), with more data becoming 
available from other countries in recent years.
Additional information from selected countries
is available in Annex 2, illustrating that
polypharmacy is a global problem. However,
variation in the structure of health care delivery 
and data collection systems, compounded 
by the different operational definitions of
polypharmacy, makes country comparison
difficult. 
Multimorbidity is defined as the presence 
of two or more long-term health conditions,
which can include (a) defined physical and
mental health conditions such as diabetes 
or schizophrenia; (b) ongoing conditions 
such as learning disability; (c) symptom
complexes such as frailty or chronic pain; 
(d) sensory impairment such as sight or
hearing loss; and (e) alcohol and substance
misuse (see Annex 1).
While its true magnitude is not known, 
the prevalence of polypharmacy is expected 
to rise due to a multitude of factors (8). First,
the global population faces a demographic 
shift with the proportion of older population
Appropriate polypharmacy is present, when (a) all medicines are prescribed for the purpose of
achieving specific therapeutic objectives that have been agreed with the patient; (b) therapeutic
objectives are actually being achieved or there is a reasonable chance they will be achieved in
the future; (c) medication therapy has been optimized to minimize the risk of adverse drug
reactions (ADRs); and (d) the patient is motivated and able to take all medicines as intended (12).
Inappropriate polypharmacy is present, when one or more medicines are prescribed that are
not or no longer needed, either because: (a) there is no evidence based indication, the indication
has expired or the dose is unnecessarily high; (b) one or more medicines fail to achieve the
therapeutic objectives they are intended to achieve; (c) one, or the combination of several
medicines cause ADRs, or put the patient at a high risk of ADRs or because (d) the patient is not
willing or able to take one or more medicines as intended (12). 
13
MEDICATION SAFETY IN POLYPHARMACY
groups on the rise. It has been estimated 
that the global population aged over 65 years
will double from 8% in 2010 to 16% in 2050
(24). In 2015, approximately 5% of the
population in OECD countries were aged 
80 years and above, this percentage is
expected to rise more than double by 2050
(25). Second, epidemiological data indicates
that multimorbidity increases markedly 
with age. In a Scottish study, multimorbidity
was prevalent in 81.5% of individuals aged 
85 years and over, with a mean number of 3.62
morbidities (26). Ornstein et al. found that the
most prevalent chronic conditions in primary
care were hypertension (33.5%), hyperlipidemia
(33.0%), and depression (18.7%) (27). The
presence of multiple morbidities is associated
with multiple symptoms, impairments and
disabilities. Multimorbidity may result in 
a combined negative effect on physical 
and mental health, and can have a major
impact on a person’s quality of life, limiting
daily activities and reducing mobility (28, 29).
The need to take multiple medications can be
just as problematic, resulting in frequent health
care contacts and an increase in the likelihood
of medication-related harm (30). Furthermore,
it imposes a large economic burden due 
to patients’ complexity of health care needs
and frequent interaction with health services,
which may be fragmented, ineffective and
incomplete (31). 
Despite extensive advances in
pharmacotherapy, the availability of clinical
guidelines for older adults with multiple
morbidities is limited (28). Prescribing is largely
based on evidence-based guidance for single
diseases, which does not generally take into
account multimorbidity (21, 28, 32).
Consequently, patients are often prescribed
several medicines recommended by a number
of specialists using disease-specific guidelines
which in combination makes the management
of any single disease challenging and may 
even lead to patient harm (21, 26).
1.3 Economic impact 
of polypharmacy
Advancing the responsible use of medicines:
applying levers for change identified several
opportunities to reduce health care spending
through more responsible use of medicines
worldwide. The authors estimated that
mismanaged polypharmacy contributed to 4%
of the world’s total avoidable costs due 
to suboptimal medicine use. A total of US$ 18
billion, 0.3% of the global total health
expenditure could be avoided by appropriate
polypharmacy management. Some of the
specific recommendations outlined in the 
report included (33):
• investment in medical audits targeting older
patients with multiple medications;
• support for a greater role of pharmacists in
medication management and in collaboration
with health care professionals for review 
of therapeutic plans;
• identification of high-risk patients and
preparation of targeted medicine
management plans for this group; and
• to establish a system for blame-free reporting
of medication errors.
The objectives of polypharmacy management
should be comprehensive, addressing such
issues as improved health outcomes for 
the patient and population, greater patient
engagement in therapeutic decision-making
and cost-effectiveness of health care systems
and resources. This comprehensive approach –
embracing care, health and cost – has been
termed the “triple aim” strategy, and it is
designed to guide health system performance
optimization (34). The term has been built 
upon to become a “quadruple aim” upon
recognizing that staff wellbeing is essential 
to ensure good care for the public (35). 
Improved safety and quality leading 
to economic benefits 
In a randomized control trial by Gillespie et al.
clinical pharmacists performed comprehensive
medication reviews (see Annex 1) of older
hospitalized patients. Patients that received 
