and Ebola (filoviruses), Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (bunyavirus), and South
American hemorrhagic fever (arenaviruses), but less frequently associated with dengue
(flavivirus), Rift Valley fever (bunyavirus) or Lassa fever (arenavirus). Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is related to Lassa fever virus, and some strains of LCMV
can be used to model aspects of severe Lassa fever.
The Arenaviridae have the largest number of virus species known to cause VHF. At least 10
new arenaviruses have been discovered in the last 3 years as a result of both rodent surveys
and disease outbreaks (Briese et al., 2009; Cajimat et al., 2007; 2008; Delgado et al., 2008;
Gunther et al., 2009; Lecompte et al., 2007; Milazzo et al., 2008; Palacios et al., 2008; 2010;
Vieth et al., 2007), but not all of the new viruses qualify as distinct arenavirus species
(Salvato et al., 2011).
Clinical signs of VHF are fever, rash, buccal sores, thrombocytopenia, vascular leakage,
bleeding, edema and elevation of hepatic enzymes. Despite these universal signs, their
frequency and underlying disease mechanisms differ from one virus family to another. Our
goals were to examine the initial stages of arenavirus hemorrhagic fever in order to define
early treatment targets. We used lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus strain WE (LCMV-
WE), a risk group 3 virus that, when introduced into rhesus macaques, causes a disease that
closely resembles human infection with Lassa fever virus, a risk group 4 agent (NIH
Guidelines, 2009). This article reviews our findings and may guide other researchers who
want to build on our experiences with the LCMV-infected non-human primate model. We
hope to convince readers that this model will be most useful for testing antiviral approaches
that target host molecules.
2. Arenaviruses and arenaviral hemorrhagic fever
The first arenavirus isolated was lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) from
cerebrospinal fluid of people with aseptic meningitis (Armstrong and Lillie, 1934; Rivers
and Scott, 1935; Traub, 1936). Since these patient samples were passaged in laboratory
mice, it was difficult to distinguish whether the virus came from mouse or man.
Nevertheless, viruses were exchanged between three laboratories and their relationship was
confirmed by serology (Rivers and Scott, 1936). In 1956, Tacaribe virus (TCRV) was found
in Caribbean fruit bats (Downs WG, et al., 1963), making it the only arenavirus to have a
non-rodent reservoir. Research in the 1960’s identified morphological and serological
characteristics of the family Arenaviridae. In 1969, Lassa fever virus was identified by its
grainy morphology that was similar to electron micrographs of other arenaviruses including
laboratory strains of LCMV and several South American viruses (Buckley and Casals, 1970;
Rowe et al., 1970; Ruggiero et al., 1964).
The arenaviruses have since been characterized as rodent-borne enveloped viruses with a bi-
segmented ambisense single-stranded RNA genome. The large (L) RNA segment encodes
the virus polymerase (L protein) in the negative sense and matrix (Z protein) in the positive
sense, whereas the small (S) RNA segment encodes the nucleocapsid protein (NP) in the
negative sense and glycoprotein precursor (GPc) in the positive sense (Salvato and
Shimomaye, 1989). LCMV and Lassa virus belong to Old World arenavirus lineages
whereas the American arenaviruses belong to the New World lineages (Salvato et al., 2004,
2011). During European migrations to the Americas in the 16th century, LCMV probably
arrived via murine hosts well after the New World lineages had been established amongst
Sigmodontine rodents of the Americas (Albariño et al., 2010).
Zapata et al.
Page 2
Antiviral Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
3. LCMV and its natural host range
The natural reservoir hosts for arenaviruses are rodents (with the exception of TCRV that
was isolated from bats), whereas human beings and non-human primates are incidental
hosts. It is remarkable that the reservoir hosts are unscathed by infection, aside from some
decreases in fecundity, whereas primates occasionally develop severe disease. Outbreaks of
VHF are related to increased contact with natural reservoir hosts. For example, the incidence
of human infection with Junin virus, the agent for Argentine hemorrhagic fever, coincides
with the prevalence of infections amongst local rodents (Mills et al., 1992).
The LCMV host range includes monkeys, dogs, guinea pigs, rabbits, chickens and rodents
(Parker et al, 1976; Skinner and Knight, 1979), but rodents such as mice and hamsters often
carry inapparent infections while they are viremic and viruric. LCMV infection of mice has
been an excellent model for studying viral persistence, immunological tolerance, and
immunopathogenesis (reviewed by Buchmeier et al., 1980; Lehmann-Grube, 1984;
Oldstone, 2002).
4. Spectrum of LCMV infection of humans
4.1. Common forms of illness
LCMV infections in people occur infrequently and are usually related to ingestion,
inhalation or direct contact with virus shed by mice, hamsters or guinea pigs. Most LCMV
infections are subclinical or mild flu-like illnesses (Barton and Hyndman, 2000). Symptoms
appear 6 to 20 days after exposure and include fever, nausea, stiff neck, occasional
photophobia, and headache that is poorly responsive to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Disease rarely advances from meningitis (inflammation of the meninges) to
encephalitis (extensive inflammation resulting in confusion and cognitive impairment).
Disease is rarely fatal and is more often transmitted to people from rodents than from other
human beings; so LCMV infection is not considered an important public health threat. The
commonly seen LCMV disease represents the mild end of a spectrum, the extreme end of
which is occupied by severe hemorrhagic fever.
LCMV has been a frequent contaminant of tissue cultures and of experimental mice, guinea
pigs and hamsters. Consequently, numerous outbreaks of aseptic meningitis in laboratory
workers or animal handlers have been traced to LCMV infection (Bowen, 1975; Deibel et
al., 1975; Hinman et al., 1975; Smith et al., 1984; Emonet et al., 2007).
Seroprevalence amongst residents of Birmingham, Alabama ranged from 0.3% in residents
under 30 years of age to 5.4% in residents over the age of 30 (Park et al., 1997). Residents of
Baltimore showed a 4.7% seroprevalence (Childs et al., 1991) at the same time that the
Baltimore rodent population had a 3.9-13.4% seroprevalence (Childs et al., 1992).
Serosurveys of patients hospitalized with aseptic meningitis revealed 10% positivity for
LCMV, especially during winter months when mice move indoors (Adair et al., 1953;
Barton and Hyndman 2000). Foci of murine LCMV infection (37% of 56 samples) have
been noted in Bratislava, Slovakia (Reiserova et al., 1999), and in New South Wales,
Australia where a survey identified 30-52% of the feral mice to be seropositive for LCMV
(Smith et al., 1993).
4.2. Occurrence of more severe disease
During the third trimester of pregnancy, a relatively immune-suppressed state, LCMV
infection can achieve high viral titers with disastrous consequences for the fetus. Congenital
LCMV infections have been known to cause birth defects such as hydrocephalus,
chorioretinitis and mental retardation (Barton et al., 2002). It has been suggested that the
Zapata et al.
Page 3
Antiviral Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
effects of LCMV on transcription factors like PRH/HEX account for the irreversible effects
of this virus on neuronal development (Djavani et al., 2005). Ribavirin, a nucleoside analog
with therapeutic efficacy during early LASV or LCMV infection, is not recommended in
pregnancy due to its teratogenicity.
Cases of lethal human LCMV infection also resulted from transplantation of LCMV-
infected organs (Fisher et al., 2006). In one case, the donor could not be linked to any rodent
exposure. In another case the donor had come in contact with a pet hamster carrying LCMV,
then suffered a severe headache and died of a brainstem herniation. Transplanted organs
caused fatal infections in seven of eight recipients; the sole survivor had received ribavirin.
One of the recipients was a woman who died 17 days after her liver transplant with fever,
rash, diarrhea, hypernatremia, thrombocytopenia, hypoxia and kidney failure (Fisher et al.,
2006). It is controversial whether the severity of these deaths was more related to the
immune-suppressed state of the transplant recipients, the dose of the virus, or the strain of
LCMV involved. From our experience with SIV-infected monkeys, given mild and virulent
strains of LCMV, the mild strain Armstrong (LCMV-ARM) remained mild in the context of
SIV-infection, and the virulent strain (LCMV-WE) did not progress more rapidly due to the
SIV infection (Salvato and Zapata, unpublished observation). Although SIV-infection does
not provide as drastic an immune-suppression as the T-cell ablation imposed upon transplant
recipients (Wallace et al., 2000), it is possible that the severity of the transplant infections
was due to dose and strain of LCMV as well as to immune-suppression.
5. Spectrum of LCMV infection in laboratory animals
5.1. Rodents
LCMV infection of its natural reservoir host, the mouse, can vary widely depending on the
age and strain of the mouse and the dose, strain and infection-route of the virus. In general,
infection of adult immunocompetent mice elicits a vigorous cell-mediated immune response
that peaks in one week and clears the infection within two weeks (Zinkernagel and Doherty,
1974). Interference with cell-mediated immunity (by pregnancy or by genetic or chemical
knockout) usually results in chronic infection. From the 1970’s to the 1990’s LCMV
infection of inbred laboratory mice was the best experimental system for defining immune
responses to chronic infection. In the 1990’s, AIDS superseded LCMV disease, but chronic
LCMV infections continue to reveal immunological mechanisms relevant to AIDS
progression (Velu et al., 2009).
Hallmarks of murine LCMV infection such as lymphocytic infiltration into the
choriomeninges and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (Doherty et al., 1986) are less
pronounced in LCMV and Lassa-infected primates. The cell-mediated immune response so
valued for its ability to clear infection can be dangerous when the virus is inoculated
intracerebrally causing mice to die from immunopathological choriomeningitis. Over the
years, immunopathology has been further defined at a molecular and cellular level. (Doherty
and Zinkernagel, 1974) and others (Ahmed et al., 1984; Gilden et al., 1972) used adoptive
transfer and antibody ablation to eliminate the effectors of immune pathology. Antibody
treatments of mice with anti-CD8 serum eliminated both virus-specific MHC-restricted T
cells and immunopathology. Knockout mice lacking molecules involved in the cytotoxic T
cell response (perforin, granzymes, interferon and interferon receptors) also knocked-out the
immunopathological response (Kagi et al., 1996; Nansen et al, 1999). Thus, by blunting the
vigor of the cell-mediated immune response, immunopathology was alleviated and mice
were able to slip into a relatively mild chronically-infected state.
The infection outcomes of LCMV strains used commonly in mice bear little resemblance to
outcomes with the same viruses in primates. The LCMV-WE we used in non-human
Zapata et al.
Page 4
Antiviral Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
